Introducing Enriched Experiment Results in LaunchDarkly | LaunchDarkly
Skip to:
Blog
Experimentation
Introducing enriched experiment results: empowering deeper release insights
Oct 28, 2024
Introducing enriched experiment results: empowering deeper release insights
We are excited to share our enriched experiment analytics – giving LaunchDarkly Experiment...
Allison Rogers
Senior Product Marketing Manager
Data-driven decision-making is crucial for ensuring that teams are building and releasing the “right” features that positively impact user experience, optimize performance, and drive business results.
At LaunchDarkly, we know product experimentation is the key to unlocking data-driven product development. We know it’s also crucial to have access to the backing data behind an experiment result to both validate and fully understand how a recommendation was derived so that teams can make the most informed decision possible.
That’s why we are excited to share our enriched experiment analytics – giving LaunchDarkly Experimentation users even more visibility into the results of their experiments so they can quickly make more informed decisions. Read on to discover all that’s included in our enriched experimentation results release.
Enriched experiment results
The latest enhancements to LaunchDarkly’s experiment results provide the critical data you need to understand the full impact of your feature variations:
See the complete picture
: New total conversion and exposure columns give you richer insights into user behavior and feature performance.
Validate results with ease
: See the statistical calculations behind the analysis, providing transparency and confidence in your decision-making.
Minimize risk
: Expected loss calculations can help you understand the potential trade-offs of each variation, so you can choose the option that maximizes your desired outcome.
These small but powerful additions enhance the context of the statistical results, let you see the exact numbers behind the analysis, and enable an informed decision on which feature variation to release.
Conversions and exposures visibility:
Get a breakdown of the number of conversions and exposures for each metric and variation. You can easily see how many people were exposed to each variation and how many completed the desired actions.
New experimentation results screen with visibility into conversions and exposures
Statistical calculations:
Behind every conversion rate, there’s more than just simple math. Hover over the results to see detailed statistical calculations and validate the results with precision. Additionally, glean extra definitional context on what conversions and exposures mean with a simple hover.
Statistical calculations tooltip
Expected loss:
Discover the estimated risk associated with each variant in your experiment. With expected loss, get a clear view of how much uplift could potentially be lost by choosing a given variant and make a more confident decision when selecting the best option (i.e. pairing a low expected loss with a high probability of beating control is a more reliable outcome).
New expected loss calculation
What does it mean for you
Save time and make decisions faster:
Avoid spending extra time validating or manually calculating key metrics. Instead, speed up the decision-making process by leveraging data directly within the experiment results and roll out the winning feature variation in real-time to maximize impact.
Validate results with confidence:
Trust your experimentation results with enhanced data at your fingertips. Quickly validate experiment results with transparent data and gain confidence you’ve made the right decisions.
Build better reports for key stakeholders:
With access to raw data, it’s easier to report experiment outcomes to leadership and showcase the tangible impact like a 15% increase in user retention, a 10% boost in average order value, or a 20% reduction in customer churn which directly impact revenue and growth.
Reduce experimentation risk:
Help
minimize the risk of underperforming launches by effectively evaluating potential outcomes, ensuring new releases are optimized for success therefore reducing the likelihood of negative business impact.
Get started today
Enriched experimentation analytics is now available to all LaunchDarkly Experimentation customers, enhancing the trust, speed, and clarity of your experimentation workflow. Simply create your next experiment to get started.
Not currently a LaunchDarkly Experimentation user? Book a
demo
today to get an inside look at our enriched analytics and so much more.
Like what you read?
Allison Rogers
Senior Product Marketing Manager
Table of Contents
Introduction
Enriched experiment results
Conversions and exposures visibility
Statistical calculations
Expected loss
What does it mean for you
Get started today
Sign up for our newsletter
Get tips and best practices on feature management, developing great AI apps, running smart experiments, and more.
Subscribe
Related Content
See all
Experimentation
Introducing sequential testing for LaunchDarkly Experimentation
Experimentation
Metric Data Sources: import multiple tables for warehouse-native experimentation
Experimentation
Introducing stratified sampling for LaunchDarkly Experimentation
Experimentation
New Experimentation tools for PMs who test, learn, and move fast
Experimentation
The Metrics glow-up: Smoother, smarter, simpler
Experimentation
Multiple Multi-Armed Bandits
Experimentation
How to learn more from the features you ship
Experimentation
Data Export: Now available for BigQuery, Databricks, Redshift, and the EU
Experimentation
The ecommerce metrics that turn browsers into buyers
Experimentation
Mastering product-centric delivery: accelerating outcomes with feature management and experimentation